[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>"Eastern Wisdom and Modern
Life" with Alan W. Watts,
produced by KQED San Francisco
for the Educational Television
and Radio Center.
Alan Watts is a
scholar, lecturer,
and the author of
many widely read
book on comparative
philosophy and religion.
Since we are now over
halfway through our series
on Eastern wisdom
and modern life,
I thought I would use this
program as an interlude,
first, for answering some
queries that have come up
about the previous
talks, and secondly,
for suggesting a number of
books which might be of interest
to you to deepen your knowledge
of the subject of Eastern
philosophy.
I've left the question of books
to this stage of the program
because I thought perhaps the
first few talks might arouse
your interest and you might
want to explore the matter more
deeply.
So then, let's go,
first of all, to some
of the questions
that have come up.
The first one has to do with
the problem of whether I'm
trying to say that Eastern
culture is after all very much
better than Western culture and,
therefore, as if I were trying
to talk our own culture down.
That's not the point at all.
First of all, I want it
to be quite clear to you
that the philosophical ideas
which I've been discussing
are as a matter of
fact only-- oh, I
would say-- held by quite a
minority of people in Asia.
Very often, the ideas that we
get about Oriental religion
and philosophy from
books will discuss simply
the beliefs of the general
masses of the people.
But what I've been talking
about are the insights
of some of the very great
sages of the Asian world.
And just as here,
just as very few
people are familiar with
the profounder levels
of Western philosophy
and religion,
so the same is true in Asia.
And these ideas filter
down to the masses
in quite a distorted form,
just as they do here.
Now in that case,
I'm not trying to say
that these ideas
have been carried out
or are exemplified in Asian
culture on a large scale.
I'm only saying
that they are ideas
from another part of the world,
from a minority of people
in that other part of the
world, which are of possible use
to us.
After all, we do have
something to learn from Asia,
just as they have
something to learn from us,
and as we have many things
that are useful to them.
And we should not visit
Asia or treat Asian peoples
with the attitude that
they are simply backward,
depressed folk in
need of our help.
This is really a very
insulting attitude.
But we can really help them.
And they will be in
the state of mind
ready to receive
our help if we go
to them with a certain humility
and say, yes, we have something
that we want to learn from you.
Because in all
conscience, our culture,
technologically
superior as it is,
is by no means free of problems.
And in an age when our
scientific knowledge has
by no means kept pace with our
moral or psychological fitness
to control it, we can
certainly do with some wisdom.
And fortunately,
just at the very time
when we are in crisis because
of these kinds of development.
Modern communications, both by
transportation and by printing
and by radio and television,
put the other half
of the world almost
in our backyard
so that we are, after
all, in the position
to learn from them.
Now the second
question that comes up
has to do with what I
was trying to communicate
in a previous program about
Eastern ideas of death
and rebirth,
particularly as they're
found in Hinduism and Buddhism.
I had suggested that the
idea that death is followed
by everlasting unconsciousness
is intrinsically absurd.
But I went on to show that
these philosophies have
an idea of rebirth which
does not involve belief
in some kind of soul entity,
some kind of psychic ego
that survives death and lives,
as it were, in a spirit world
and then transfers
itself into the new life.
And I think,
possibly, some of you
may have had some
difficulty in grasping
that idea because
at first sight,
it seems absurd to
talk about there being
any possibility of the
rebirth of consciousness
if there is not some surviving
soul that passes over
from one life to another.
And what I suggested was that
although I death involves
the destruction of memory and
therefore of what we call our I
or ego, nevertheless, there
isn't just a blank after death.
There isn't just
endless darkness
or endless nothingness.
But rather, that
nature fills the vacuum
created by unconsciousness
with a new consciousness.
Look at it in this way.
Try and remember back.
Who were you before
you were born?
If we go back in memory
as far as we can go,
we reach the same
total blankness
that we reach when we try to
go forward and see what death
would be like if it was
something like going to sleep
and never waking up.
All right.
You go into the same blankness
out of which you came.
So is there really anything
to be afraid of in it?
After death is the same
nothingness as before birth.
This, oddly enough, seems to
be a very creative nothingness.
Here you are.
You're alive now.
You have absolutely no
memory of any former life.
You've come out of the darkness.
If you go back into it, well,
a you can come out of it again.
But it'll be a different you.
What has happened once can
always happen again, after all.
In a way, you could
say this is a matter
of statistical probability.
If this universe persists
for endless time,
there is always the probability
that life may arise again
even if all life on this
planet were to be obliterated.
Just give it enough time.
And even on a statistical
basis, let alone anything else,
there's the chance of
consciousness occurring again.
On this planet or another,
in this galaxy or another,
it matters not.
Now then, the third question--
I have talked a good deal
in this program about
the Eastern idea, which
is shared by many of the great
spiritual traditions of Asia--
Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism,
and so forth-- the idea
that all life is
fundamentally one
and that the height of
wisdom consists in some way
to experience the unity of life.
And you'll remember, I
pointed out at the same time
that this does not involve a
consciousness of oneness which
obliterates the
differences between people
and between things.
And so the problem which arises
about this very naturally is
if the realization
that life is one
does not obliterate
differences, how on Earth
can one realize it?
How on Earth can one detect
something, which, as it were,
permeates everything,
doesn't alter
the differences between things?
You might say, well, does it
make any difference at all.
If for example, I were
to say, every body
in this universe, every
star, every planet
is moving in a
certain direction.
Now I said, every one
of them is moving.
So how are we to know that
they're moving at all?
This movement would
be undetectable.
And so you might ask, would not
the underlying oneness of life
be undetectable in
just the same way?
And if it's
undetectable, how can you
talk about there being
an experience of it?
Well, there are certain
kinds of experience
which are different from
what we would ordinarily
called objective experience.
There is a kind
of knowledge which
you could say is not knowledge
that we get by standing off
from things and looking at
them but what I would rather
call knowledge by participation.
There is a Chinese Zen Buddhist
poem which puts the idea.
I thought I'd write it.
And this is in
reference to the kind
of knowledge I'm talking about.
The poem says, it
is like an eye which
can see but does not itself see.
In other words,
it is like an eye
which can see but
does not see itself.
And so in the same way, although
we constantly have sight
and we are aware that we see,
in every experience of sight
we are, after all,
aware of seeing.
But we do not see sight.
And so, in rather
the same way, one
can have as a sort of
subjective knowledge,
like the knowledge of
seeing, the knowledge
of the unity of the whole world.
Also from the literature
of Zen Buddhism,
I remember this story.
Most of the literature
of Zen consists in
rather pithy and
enigmatic stories.
But this one, I don't think, is
so enigmatic as some of them.
There was an old
master called Bokoju.
And one of his students
came to him with a question.
We have to dress
and eat every day.
And how do we get
out of all that?
In other words, he was
saying, most of our life
is a boring routine.
And we get depressed by it.
How do we escape from the
routine of the daily round?
And the master
answered, we dress.
We eat.
And the student said,
I don't understand.
And the master said, if
you don't understand,
put on your clothes
and eat your food.
In other words,
get right into it.
For this is a question, you see,
of knowledge by participation
as distinct from
knowledge by standing off.
And the point is that this
strange, powerful, convincing
sense of the unity of life
comes to people who, as it were,
become united with
their own experience.
Now very often, one
has the sensation
of one's experience as
being something out there
and thus away from and
different from you.
And you are aware
of yourself looking
at what you're experiencing.
But when you thoroughly go
into experience-- for example,
when you're listening
to a concert
and you are really
absorbed in the concert,
you don't think while
you're sitting there,
well, I am listening to music.
I am improving my culture
by being at this concert.
No.
You, as it were, become the
music in listening to it.
And in this moment, you are
one with your experience.
The same thing is done
in every detail of life
throughout one's whole total day
of, as it were, going into it
and thus not having the
constant sensation of it
is I am experiencing this.
And so when one, as
it were, becomes one
with one's experience,
one can no longer
be the victim of
one's experience.
And so to grasp the idea
of the oneness of life,
you mustn't, as it
were, try to get it
by thinking, and thinking,
and thinking about it.
You have to get it by
going right into your life
as it happens.
You know, there are
limits to thinking.
It's like boiling an egg
or cooking a souffle.
If you boil an egg too long,
it becomes much too hard.
If you cook a souffle
too long in the oven
it's absolutely ruined.
And there's a moment to stop.
And so with thinking.
We can think, and think, and
think, and worry, and worry,
and worry over certain problems.
But beyond a certain point,
thinking about it anymore
just makes things more
and more confused.
I remember another
of these Zen stories
where there was a old
master called Gensha.
And a student came to him to
be instructed in Buddhism.
And he seemed to
do nothing but be
a kind of personal
attendant on the master.
He took care of the
house and served
his master's very simple needs.
And after about three months,
he said to the master, look,
I've been here with
you three months.
And so far, I've receive no
instruction from you at all.
And the master said, "What?
No instruction?
I have been instructing
you all the time."
"Well, in what way?,"
said the student.
"Well," said the master,
"when you brought me my rice,
didn't I eat it?
When you brought me my
tea, didn't I drink it?
When you made salutations
to me, didn't I return them?
When did I ever neglect
to instruct you?"
But the student said,
"I don't understand."
And the master said, "If
you want to see into it,
see into it directly.
But when you begin
to think about it,
it's altogether missed."
Well now, I think I've dealt
with the main questions.
And now we can go on to
the consideration of books.
I have tried in choosing
books to talk about
to pick books that
are very easily
available and inexpensive.
And therefore, most of
the ones I've chosen
are pocketbooks in paper covers.
And the first one is an
extraordinarily good book--
Heinrich Zimmer's
"Philosophies of India"
published by Meridian Books.
That's by Heinrich
Zimmer, Z-I-M-M-E-R.
Heinrich Zimmer was a very,
very great German Orientalist.
He came to this country
during the Nazi regime
and, unfortunately, died in the
prime of his life around 1940.
And therefore, his writings
have been edited from notes
by Joseph Campbell.
And this book is one of
the very best introductions
to Indian philosophy
that you can get.
It's extraordinarily
fascinatingly written.
And it includes all
branches of Indian thought.
It's a very
comprehensive book for it
deals not only with
the types of philosophy
that I've been
talking about, those
that deal with the
ultimate questions of life.
It also deals with political
and social philosophies
in the first part the book.
And I recommend this
very, very highly indeed
for getting a comprehensive view
of the whole thought of India.
And then I think
what I should like
to recommend next would be
some of the original sources
of Indian philosophy.
First of all, "The
Upanishads," the translation
of the fundamental scriptures of
Indian philosophy, sacred texts
which were composed,
oh, probably
somewhere between about
800 BC and the beginning
of the Christian Era.
They are very, very
beautiful writings,
largely in poetic form,
and largely consisting
of dialogues and discussions
between the teachers or rishis,
forest sages, and
their disciples.
And this particular
edition has been translated
from the Sanskrit by Swami
Prabhavananda and Frederick
Manchester.
And it's in Mentor Books.
I think I should write down the
name Prabhavananda as it's not
very clear on the
book and it's one
of those complicated
Indian names,
if you want to
take a note of it.
That's "The Upanishads."
fundamentally
important to an understanding
of Indian philosophy.
It's really the original source
from which the teaching called
Vedanta, which is kind
of the core of Hinduism,
it's the original source
on which that is based.
Now the next book I
want to show is likewise
an important source
of Indian philosophy.
It's called "The Bhagavad-Gita."
This means the song, Gita,
Bhagavad, of the lord.
You could say that
"The Bhagavad-Gita"
is the most popular book
in India itself having
to do with Hindu
philosophy and religion.
This translation of
"The Bhagavad-Gita"
is likewise by
Swami Prabhavananda
and assisted by the novelist
and playwright, Christopher
Isherwood.
And this is also a Mentor Book.
"The Bhagavad-Gita"
is, for the most part,
a dialogue between
Krishna, who is
a divine sage, the
incarnation of Vishnu,
one of the aspects
of the godhead,
and a dialogue between
Krishna and Arjuna,
a warrior, which takes
place on a battlefield.
And Krishna speaks with Arjuna
about his fear of slaying,
and death, and of
the turmoil of life.
And the symbol of
the battlefield
is the symbol of the
whole turmoil and struggle
of this world and what should
be one's attitude to it.
That's "The
Bhagavad-Gita," the song
of the lord or the
song of God, translated
by Swami Prabhavananda
and Christopher Isherwood.
Now let me see.
The next I would very
strongly recommend
is a book about Vedanta-- "Man
and His Becoming According
to the Vedanta" by Rene Guenon.
G-U-E-N-O-N. This is
published by Noonday.
This is one of the
best, you might say,
textbooks about
Vedanta philosophy.
And one thing I'd warn
you about in reading
the writings of
this particular man,
he has an extraordinarily
haughty style of talking.
He sounds, in a way,
insufferably proud.
And he seems to
talk down to you.
You, I think, could
overlook that.
Because in spite of
this attitude he has,
he has a lot of things are
very well worth saying.
And if you can overlook
this haughtiness of style
and simply concentrate on
the positive information
in the book, it's a very
valuable book indeed.
And I'm so glad to see
that this has come out
in a cheap edition.
"Man and His Becoming
According to the Vedanta"
by Rene Guenon, French writer.
Now I also think it's
important to read books
that show something of the
effect of the philosophy
upon the culture.
And in regard to Indian
philosophy and Indian culture,
I would particularly
recommend this.
It's called "The Dance of
Shiva" by Ananda Coomaraswamy.
I think you can probably
see the name clearly.
Again, it's another
complex Indian name.
Ananda Coomaraswamy
was, for many years,
a research fellow
at the Boston Museum
of Fine Arts-- a man
an astounding learning.
He knew ever so many languages
and was a great authority
on comparative art,
religion, mythology, culture,
all kinds of things.
He was a very expert carpenter,
fisherman-- a very all-around
man like the great characters
of the Renaissance,
men like Pico Della Mirandola
and Leonardo DaVinci, men
of this stature.
And his book "The
Dance of Shiva"
is a discussion
of various aspects
of Indian culture, its politics,
music, sculpture, painting,
position of women,
philosophy of love,
all kinds of questions in
relation to Indian philosophy.
It's very readable and
a very excellent volume.
That's "The Dance of
Shiva" by Coomaraswami,
published by Noonday.
Now I think we'll
move over to China.
This, I think, is the
most easily available
and one of the very best
books for an introduction
to Chinese philosophy--
"The Wisdom
of Laotse" by Lin Yutang.
It's published in
the Modern Library.
Now the advantage
of this book is
that it contains a translation
of the works of Laotse,
the scripture that he wrote,
and the commentary-- well, it
isn't exactly a
commentary on it.
Lin Yutang has so translated
it to use it as a commentary,
but it's the writings of
another great Chinese Taoist
philosopher.
And I'll write his name down.
He is called Chuang-Tzu.
Chuang-Tze is an absolutely
delightful person,
one of the most humorous
philosophers whoever wrote.
He's very, very
entertaining to read.
I mean, he
illustrates his points
with all sorts of
delightful anecdotes.
I remember one of two people
having an argument on a bridge
and looking down into the water.
And one of them says,
oh, how the fishes
are enjoying themselves
down there in water.
And the other says, you,
not being a fish, how could
you possibly know
how the fishes feel?
To which he replies,
you, not knowing me,
how could know
that I do not know?
And that sort of thing is all
the way through Chuang-Tze.
But Chuang-Tze is also one
of the most clear, and lucid,
and profound exponents
of the Taoist philosophy
that ever lived.
So these two men are both
translated in this volume
of Lin Yutang's, "The Wisdom
of Laotse," L-A-O-T-S-E,
or you can spell it T-Z-U,
by Lin Yutang in the Modern
Library.
Then books on Buddhism.
It's very difficult to find a
really good overall textbook
about Buddhism.
But certainly, I think
the best available
is this one "Buddhism"
by Christmas Humphreys,
in the Pelican Series
published by Penguin Books.
That's a British publication.
This is an extraordinarily
comprehensive outline
of Buddhism and is really
the most thorough study
of the subject available
on the market today.
Even though I feel there
are one or two rather
serious defects in
it, nevertheless I
think this is the
best available.
There is, incidentally,
a discussion
of fundamentals
of Buddhism, which
you can get in a shorter
form, in my own book
"The Way of Zen."
The first chapters are
devoted to an outline
of some of the fundamental
ideas of Oriental philosophy.
And this book, "The Way of
Zen," is published by Pantheon.
And then as a book which
sums up most of the ideas
I've been talking to you about,
I would suggest this "Nature,
Man and Woman," also
published by Pantheon.
And you might well
use it as a manual
to go along with
this whole series.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is National
Educational Television.